Relevant Content:
merge simply to exploit that system more fully. Their merger can help us understand the places where the system is broken, but it won't fix any of them. That will only happen if we get organized and limit the power of their industry.

(Host) Nearly every time you buy something, you're paying an invisible toll. It's not to the worker who made the product or to the business that provided the service. It's to the hidden middlemen at the center of our economy. (Ad) I buy everything on my Platinum Cashback everyday credit card. With no preset spending limit, less hassle and more convenience. What's in your wallet? (Host) Credit cards. At this point they're basically how we pay for everything, but we rarely think about how they actually work. (Elena) Credit cards are a truly massive transfer of wealth from working class and middle class people to the wealthy. (Sam) Credit card companies are some of the most profitable corporations in the world. Why? Do they really add that much value to our lives? They're getting money from both sides and loving it. It's not so great for the rest of us. (Sam) In February, Capital One, the massive credit card lender, announced that it's merging with a competitor, Discover. The merger, if it happens, would create the largest credit card company in the US. When I started digging into the details, I was genuinely shocked. Not just by the merger, but by how the credit card industry already operates. The fees that we pay are absolutely exorbitant. (Sam) It's an industry with cartel-like pricing, and the private tax it imposes on all of us adds up to hundreds of billions of dollars a year. To understand how it works, let's start with a simple question: How do credit card companies make money? We can divide that into two categories. First, money they make from buyers: from interest and fees on cardholders like me and you. Second, money they make from sellers: from swipe fees charged to retailers on every sale. Let's look at the buyer side first. This market is dominated by the big credit card lenders, like Capital One. I talked to somebody who knows this market from the inside. So I started right out of college as an analyst. (Sam) Elena Botella worked at Capital One from 2013

by lowering swipe fees, they compete by raising them. That's because their customers are not the retailers, and they're certainly not us. It’s exactly upside down. Their customers are actually the banks that issue credit and debit cards. And what they're selling is, “Hey, we’ll set these prices high for you.” Over time, what we've seen is Visa and Mastercard compete to raise the fees higher and higher on merchants. So in that sense, they are trying to keep a customer happy, it's just destructive for the rest of us. (Sam) So if a merger won't help, how can we fix this upside down market and lower these fees? We could cap the fees, like they do in Europe, at 0.3%. That's about 1/10th of what we pay. And Visa and Mastercard are doing just fine in Europe. Or we could create real competition by requiring each credit card lender to do business with at least two payment networks. That could drive swipe fees down, as retailers would get to choose the network with the lowest fee. A bill now being considered in the U.S. Senate, called the Credit Card Competition Act, would do just that. But in the last two years, Visa, Mastercard, and the major credit card lenders have spent over $50 million to oppose that bill. Tellingly, they appear less threatened by the possibility of a Capital One merger with Discover. What's really interesting is Visa and Mastercard as well as other banks, you would think they would be running around Washington saying, “We're worried about competing with this new behemoth.” Except they're not. And the reason they're not is they're all in this cartel structure together, so there's no reason to complain. (Sam) The purpose of a payment system ought to be to make it as efficient and inexpensive as possible to buy and sell things. And with today's technology, the cost of moving money should be very close to zero. But whether we like it or not, we're beholden to a warped system that the credit card companies have built. Capital One and Discover are trying to